2009 update (#162)
MicrosoftDocs/Console-Docs: docs/ecosystem-roadmap.md

## Architecture

The general architecture of the system is in four parts: client, device, server, and terminal. Each is connected to the adjacent items in the list with the two ends as the respective source and destination to command-line communication.

### Client

A client is a command-line application that interprets a user's desires through a text-based interface, performs work or dispatches further commands, and returns a text representation of the result. On Windows, the console API or the standard console handles with device control APIs provide a communications layer between the client and the device.

### Device

The device is an intermediate message handling communications layer between two processes, the client and the server. On Windows, this is the console driver, while on other platforms, it is the TTY or PTY device. Other devices like files, pipes, and sockets may be used as this communication channel if the entire transaction is in plain text or contains [virtual terminal sequences](console-virtual-terminal-sequences.md), but not with [Windows Console APIs](console-functions.md).

### Server

> The server interprets the requested API calls or messages from the client. On Windows in the classic operating mode, it also creates a user interface to present the output to the screen and collects input to send back in response messages to the client via the driver, like a terminal bundled in the same module. With the [pseudoconsole](pseudoconsoles.md) mode, it instead is only a translator to present this information in [virtual terminal sequences](console-virtual-terminal-sequences.md) to an attached Terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server interprets the requested API calls or messages from the client. On Windows in the classic operating mode, it also creates a user interface to present the output to the screen and collects input to send back in response messages to the client via the driver, like a terminal bundled in the same module. With the [pseudoconsole](pseudoconsoles.md) mode, it instead is only a translator to present this information in [virtual terminal sequences](console-virtual-terminal-sequences.md) to an attached terminal.

```

### Terminal

The terminal is the final layer providing graphical display and interactivity services to the user. It is responsible for capturing input and encoding it as [virtual terminal sequences](console-virtual-terminal-sequences.md) to eventually reach the client's `STDIN` and decoding and presenting the plain text and _virtual terminal sequences_ it received back from the client's `STDOUT`.

#### Further Connections

> As an addendum, further connections can be performed by chaining applications that serve multiple roles into one of the endpoints. For instance, an SSH session has two roles: it is a Terminal for the command-line application running on one device, but it forwards all received information on to a Client role on another device. This chaining can occur indefinitely across devices and contexts offering broad scenario flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an addendum, further connections can be performed by chaining applications that serve multiple roles into one of the endpoints. For instance, an SSH session has two roles: it is a terminal for the command-line application running on one device, but it forwards all received information on to a client role on another device. This chaining can occur indefinitely across devices and contexts offering broad scenario flexibility.

```

> On non-Windows platforms, the Server and Terminal roles are a single unit because there is no need for a translation compatibility layer between an API set and [virtual terminal sequences](console-virtual-terminal-sequences.md) as there is on Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On non-Windows platforms, the server and terminal roles are a single unit because there is no need for a translation compatibility layer between an API set and [virtual terminal sequences](console-virtual-terminal-sequences.md) as there is on Windows.

```

### Windows Terminal

This is the new Windows interface for command-line applications, intended as a first-party example of using the [pseudoconsole](pseudoconsoles.md) to separate the concerns between API servicing and text-based application interfacing, much like all non-Windows platforms. It is intended to be the flagship text mode user interface for Windows and demonstrate the capabilities of the ecosystem, drive Windows development toward a unification with other platforms, and be an example of how to build a robust and complex modern application that spans the history and gamut of Windows APIs and frameworks. Per the definitions above, this product operates in a terminal role.

> ## Roadmap

Reviewer 2: Maybe "History & Roadmap"?

Author: I'd rather not, if that's OK. I think it's fine to talk about history and future as a map.

### Terminal applications

**\[2019-Now\]** This era is the open source era for the console subsystem including the new Windows Terminal project. As of the Microsoft Build conference in May 2019, the entire project is on GitHub at [microsoft/terminal](https://github.com/microsoft/terminal). The focus now is building the Windows Terminal application on top of the refined platform for [pseudoconsole](pseudoconsoles.md)s to bring a first class terminal experience directly to developers on the Windows platform.

> It is intended not only as a showcase for the platform including the [WinUI](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/winui/) technology, the [MSIX](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/msix/) packaging model, and the [C++/WinRT](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/uwp/cpp-and-winrt-apis/) component architecture, but also as a validation of the platform itself, driving the Windows organization to open and evolve the app platform as necessary to continue to lift the productivity of developers. The Windows Terminal's unique set of power user and developer requirements drive the modern Windows platform requirements for what those markets truly need from Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is intended not only as a showcase for the platform including the [WinUI](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/winui/) technology, the [MSIX](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/msix/) packaging model, and the [C++/WinRT](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/uwp/cpp-and-winrt-apis/) component architecture, but also as a validation of the platform itself, driving the Windows organization to open and evolve the app platform as necessary to continue to lift the productivity of developers. Windows Terminal's unique set of power user and developer requirements drive the modern Windows platform requirements for what those markets truly need from Windows.

```
Nit: for the Terminal docs, we've been avoiding "the" Windows Terminal

### Standard Handles

The standard handles are a series of handles, `STDIN`, `STDOUT`, and `STDERR`, that are introduced a part of process space on startup and represent a place where information can be accepted on the way in and sent back on the way out (including a special place to report errors out). For command-line applications, these must always exist when the application starts and are either inherited from the parent automatically, set explicitly by the parent, or created automatically by the operating system if neither of the first two are specified/permitted. For classic windows applications, these may be blank on startup, but can be implicitly or explicitly inherited from the parent or allocated, attached, and freed during runtime by the application itself.

Standard handles do not imply a specific type of attached device, though in the case of command-line applications, the device is most commonly a console device, file (from redirection in a shell), or a pipe (from a shell connecting the output of one utility to the input of the next). It may also be a socket or any other type of device.

### TTY/PTY

> On non-Windows platforms, the TTY and PTY devices represent respectively either a true physical device or a software-created pseudo-device that represent the same as a Windows console session: a channel where communication between a command-line client application and a server host interactivity application or physical keyboard/display device can exchange text-based information.

Reviewer 3: `represent the same as` => `represent the same thing as`?

Author: "that are the same concept as"

given that I used the word represent twice in the sentence too

### Clients and Servers

Within this space, we're referring to "clients" as applications that do the work of processing information and running commands. The "server" applications are those that are responsible for the user interface and are workers to translate input and output into standard forms on behalf of the clients.

### Console Subsystem

> This is a catch-all term representing all modules in the console team's space. It specifically refers to a flag that is a part of the Portable Executable header that specifies whether the starting application is either a command-line/console application (and must have standard handles to start) or a windows application (and does not need them).

Reviewer 3: hmm... console team doesn't mean much to external folks

Author: clarified to not talk about us

> The console host, command-line client applications, the console driver, the console API surface, the psuedoconsole infrastructure, terminals, configuration property sheets, the mechanisms and stubs inside the process loader, and any utilities related to the workings of these forms of applications are considered to belong to this group.

Reviewer 3: `psuedo` -> `pseudo`

### Console Host

The Windows Console Host, or `conhost.exe`, is both the server application for all of the Windows Console APIs as well as the classic Windows user interface for working with command-line applications. The complete contents of this binary, both the API server and the UI, historically belonged to Windows `csrss.exe`, a critical system process, and was diverged for security and isolation purposes. Going forward, this binary will continue to be responsible for API call servicing and translation, but the user-interface components are intended to be delegated through a pseudoconsole to a terminal.

### Psuedoconsole

> This is the Windows simulation of a pseudoterminal or "PTY" from other platforms. It tries to match the general interface philosophy of PTYs, providing a simple bidirectional channel of text based communication, but it supplements it on Windows with a large compatibility layer to translate the breadth of Windows applications written prior to this design philosophy change from the classic console API surface into the simple text channel communication form. Terminals can use the pseudoconsole to take ownership of the user-interface elements away from the console host, `conhost.exe`, while leaving the API servicing, translation, and compatibility efforts with that OS component.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the Windows simulation of a pseudoterminal or "PTY" from other platforms. It tries to match the general interface philosophy of PTYs, providing a simple bidirectional channel of text based communication, but it supplements it on Windows with a large compatibility layer to translate the breadth of Windows applications written prior to this design philosophy change from the classic console API surface into the simple text channel communication form. Terminals can use the pseudoconsole to take ownership of the user-interface elements away from the console host, `conhost.exe`, while leaving it in charge of API servicing, translation, and compatibility.
```

Author: yes great. updated.

### Terminal

A terminal is the user-interface and interaction module for a command-line application. Today, it's a software representation of what used to be historically a physical device with a display monitor, a keyboard, and a bidirectional serial communication channel. It is responsible for gathering input from the user in a variety of forms, translating it and encoding it and any special command information into a single text stream, and submitting it to the PTY for transmission on to the `STDIN` channel of the command-line client application. It is also responsible for receiving back information, via the PTY, that came from a client application's `STDOUT` channel, decoding any special information in the payload, laying out all the text and additional commands, and presenting that graphically to the end user.

## Products

All of our products are now available on GitHub in our open source repository, [Microsoft/Terminal](https://github.com/microsoft/terminal).

### Windows Console Host

> This is the traditional Windows user-interface for command-line applications. It handles all console API servicing called from any attached command-line application as well as the graphical user interface representation on behalf of all of those applications. It is found as `conhost.exe`, or `openconsole.exe` in its open source form. It comes with the Windows operating system and can be redistributed from the open source repository for a more up-to-date usage of the pseudoconsole infrastructure with a modern terminal application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the traditional Windows user-interface for command-line applications. It handles all console API servicing called from any attached command-line application as well as the graphical user interface representation on behalf of all of those applications. It is found in the system directory as `conhost.exe`, or `openconsole.exe` in its open source form. It comes with the Windows operating system and can be redistributed from the open source repository for a more up-to-date implementation of the pseudoconsole infrastructure with a modern terminal application.
```

(speaking of: this document explicitly says "DISTRIBUTE OPENCONSOLE!")
